---
title: Personal Thoughts on Two-Stage Test Format
published: true
---
> Reflect on the two-stage test format.  If this is your first time having a test in this format, what did you think of it?  In what was was it or was it not effective?  What did you like or not like about it?  If you're had a two-stage test before, in what ways was this experience different?  How do the two experiences compare?

<br />

CSC290 is a course that gives me as a student a very unique experience unlike other courses I have ever taken in an university. Not only is the teaching and learning experience a lot different but also how the test is formatted. This course has exposed me with the existence of a two-stage test where collaboration between students is allowed on a test. Normally, tests would be very stressful since students are pressured against a very limited time to utilize their abilities and knowledge they have learned to the test. This component of a test still exists in a two-stage test since the first stage of the test is done individually. I find that most students (including myself) will often cram in as much information they can before the test and often learn nothing from the course. The idea of university is to learn but I find that learning gets hindered when I am forced to cram information to just pass the course. The 2nd stage of the two-stage test allows you to not only retain information you learn from the course better but also learn from your mistakes. The 2nd-stage test is where students work together in groups to complete a test similar to that of the first stage. This promotes discussion among students to lay out their reasonings which allows students to learn from others and retain these information much easier. This also enhances students' teamwork and communication skills since these skills are very essential in the test to succeed. What I personally enjoyed seeing is that whenever there was a disagreement, students will try to justify their answer to the group and the group will discuss among each other what the best answer is from these arguments. The idea of flowing knowledge and ideas promotes learning and critical thinking. From my personal experience from this two-stage test is that it gives a more relaxing environment to learn and communicate with each other. I never experienced a test where it is more relaxed than this two-stage test. However, I also noticed that discussing about the test with a group can lead to a slow progress in actually completing the test itself. The amount of discussion students can have on the test may exceed the time allocated to the 2nd stage of the test which can be problematic. But I see this as an opportunity to experience and learn how to effectively manage time with a group. Group work requires a lot of collaboration and leadership. Students need to learn how to effectively manage their time with a group since time is a precious resource in the workforce.
