---
layout: post
title: Another Look at scanf - scanset
categories: [programming, c]
---

It came to my attention from an embedded course on [udemy](https://www.udemy.com/course/microcontroller-embedded-c-programming/) the existence of **scanset** in `scanf`

As most of you would know, `scanf` and its variants are functions that scans from the input according to some format you specify such as `%d` for an integer or `%c` for a char. However, did you know that `scanf` has the flexibility to whitelist or blacklist characters? This can be done by specifying a **scanset** in the format string. Based on the name **scanset** itself, it implies that **scanset** is a set of characters you provide for `scanf` to scan for. To be specific, **scanset** is a specifier where you can specify a character or a set of characters to either accept or reject. To specify a **scanset**, you encase the set of characters inside square brackets. 
**Note:** the set is case sensitive

It may be hard to understand without an example, so here's an example of a using `scanf` to only accept the character `a` only:

`scanf("%[a]", buffer);`

If you wish to stop reading the input upon reading some character in a set, you can specify your scanset with `^`. For instance, you can have `scanf` stop reading after the first occurrence of a period (`.`) to extract the first sentence of an input with the following call:

`scanf(%[^.], buffer);`

## Benefits
To put it simply, this saves you the trouble of writing code to process from the input the desired string you wish to look at. To extract information from a string not delimited by whitespace such as CSV, you would have to look through `strtok`. However, with **scanset**, you can extract the data from a CSV with one scanf call. For instance, let's say we want to parse a CSV with the format `first_name, last_name, age`. The code to scan a CSV would look something like this:
```
scanf("%[^,],%[^,],%d\n", fname, lname, &age);
```

See how convenient that was. Just one line of code is needed to parse a line of data from a CSV file. All we need to do is add a loop and we parse the entire csv file:
```c
while(scanf("%[^,],%[^,],%d\n", fname, lname, &age) == 3) {
    printf("========================\n");
    printf("First Name: %s\n", fname);
    printf("Last Name : %s\n", lname);
    printf("age       : %d\n", age);
}
```
**output:**
```
$ ./a.out < data.csv 
========================
First Name: John
Last Name : Smith
age       : 20
========================
First Name: Mary
Last Name : Lee
age       : 21
========================
First Name: Marco
Last Name : Polo
age       : 19
```

Similarly to character class in Regex, you can specify ranges as well. For instance, `%[A-Z]` matches uppercase characters only, while `%[0-5]` matches a string with digits that fall within the range 0-5 (inclusive).

Anyhow, that was all I wanted to share for today. I just thought it was neat that `scanf` can do more than what I initially thought.