---
layout: post
title: QNX - Bankrupt Partitions
description: A look into QNX APS feature
categories: [programming, c/c++, aps, qnx]
---

In preparation to my presentation on QNX APS (Adaptive Partitioning System), I decided to write 
a blog that goes through what partitions are, how to control resources in QNX, and what APS are.

As resources are limited, there is a need for a way to control how much resources a process can consume. 
Traditionally, sysadmin would set limits to users and processes. This is probably noticeable on lab machines in universities, 
machines that are shared among many students to prevent any malicious user or process from denying resources to others. This 
can be done using `ulimit`, a utility to view or set limits to a particular process.

For instance, here's the resource limit of my account on my personal Linux machine.
```
$ ulimit -Sa
real-time non-blocking time  (microseconds, -R) unlimited
core file size              (blocks, -c) unlimited
data seg size               (kbytes, -d) unlimited
scheduling priority                 (-e) 0
file size                   (blocks, -f) unlimited
pending signals                     (-i) 62398
max locked memory           (kbytes, -l) 8192
max memory size             (kbytes, -m) unlimited
open files                          (-n) 1024
pipe size                (512 bytes, -p) 8
POSIX message queues         (bytes, -q) 819200
real-time priority                  (-r) 0
stack size                  (kbytes, -s) 8192
cpu time                   (seconds, -t) unlimited
max user processes                  (-u) 62398
virtual memory              (kbytes, -v) unlimited
file locks                          (-x) unlimited
```

If I was to share the machine with another user, I would for instance limit the 
number of files and processes that can be opened and spawned to avoid them 
from fork bombing my machine.

There are POSIX Calls such as `getrlimit` and `setrlimit` to display or set resource 
consumption. There are other function calls (non-POSIX) such as `prlimit` to set and 
view resource consumption on both QNX and Linux. In fact, `rlimit` function calls are 
just wrappers to `prlimit()` according to the documentation ([QNX](http://www.qnx.com/developers/docs/7.1/index.html#com.qnx.doc.neutrino.lib_ref/topic/s/setrlimit.html) and [Linux](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/prlimit.2.html).

However, `rlimit` only applies to individual users (for Linux) and applications. That is where 
cgroups and partitions come to play. `cgroups` (Control Groups) is a feature on the Linux kernel 
that allows admins to allocate resources to a group/partition of tasks and are much more complex 
compared to what QNX offers where only the CPU resources can be controlled. As this is an article 
about QNX and not Linux, I will not go into subsystems and how that explains why separate hierarchies of cgroups 
are necessary. You can read [Redhat's documentation](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/6/html/resource_management_guide/sec-relationships_between_subsystems_hierarchies_control_groups_and_tasks) 
if you are interested.
 
On QNX, the term partition is used instead of containers (the old term for cgroups) or groups to describe 
the controlled use of processor resources (i.e. processing time) that is isolated from other partitions ([Glossary](http://www.qnx.com/developers/docs/7.1/index.html#com.qnx.doc.neutrino.sys_arch/topic/glossary.html)). 
Essentially you can divide CPU processing time in virtual objects called container where processes can be executed in and be limited to the partition's CPU budget (the amount of processing time that is allocated to the partition).

* check `/proc/<PID>/limits



